All right, thank you very much for having me. I cannot believe I'm here. It's so far
away from where I live, but also so exciting to be here. So thank you so much to Monash
University for having me out for the next two weeks. And I'm really glad that the timing
worked out to be able to give this talk today. So today I want to talk about what's new in
the tidyverse. As Emi mentioned, I work with the tidyverse team pretty closely, mostly
in terms of sort of developing educational materials for it. But oftentimes, developing
educational materials after something is built isn't necessarily the best way to go about
things. So I very much enjoy being able to sort of be involved with the development process,
thinking about things from the perspective of learners and educators. So I'm going to
talk a little bit about, very quickly, about the tidyverse. I assume a lot of you know
about it. But turns out it is more than just those cute hex logos that we saw here. But
if you're here for those, I'm going to put them here. Yeah, that's like one perk of working
at Paws that you can always get these hex stickers. Okay, so let's talk a little bit
about the principles of the tidyverse. So tidyverse itself is a meta R package that
loads nine core packages when invoked. And what's special about these packages is that
they share a design philosophy, a common grammar, and data structures. So this is what it looks
like when you first load the tidyverse. And when we think about this sort of figure for
data science in terms of the data science cycle, we can see that many of these packages
map on to many of the steps of the data science cycle. I'm going to use the Palmer Penguins
dataset, the Penguins dataset from the Palmer Penguins package for some of my examples here.
And for those of you who may not be familiar with it, it is a dataset of a little over
300 penguins, and we have some body measurements on them that are numerical variables and a
couple of categorical variables like species, island, and sex. And this is what a typical
tidyverse pipeline looks like. So you can see that we start with the data frame, we
do some stuff to it, and then we visualize it. And this is what a typical tidyverse workflow
looks like. You start with a data frame, and then you say, I want to group my data by species
and sex, and then I want to, let's say, calculate the mean body weight of these penguins. And
then you realize, oh, there's a warning, I wonder what that means, or a message, and
then you sort of adjust to it. There are some NAs we were seeing here, and I'm going to
send the output, and I'm going to say, let's drop those NAs, let's take care of the message
about our data being grouped, which I'm going to say a bit more about a little later in
the talk. And then, now that I have a data set that I can visualize, I can pipe this
into a visualization sort of pipeline and make a bar plot. And that bar plot doesn't
really make a whole lot of sense to me. Maybe something like this, where the bars are dodged,
makes a little bit more sense. Frankly, as a statistician, these sorts of plots really
bother me, where you're sort of plotting the mean without any sort of data about the variability
within each of these groups. But regardless, as a typical tidyverse pipeline, I would say
this is sort of the thing you might do the first day you start learning tidyverse. So
let's keep that in mind, and let's talk a little bit about what I'm going to talk about
in this presentation. Sometimes I'm going to show you a slide that looks like this,
where it says, previously, you used to do this, and now you should do this. But most
of the time in the presentation, I'm going to say, previously, you used to do this in
the tidyverse, and now you can do this. And you'll see that the latter will be a lot more
often. So while I'm talking about the updates to the tidyverse, I'm not mostly talking about
changes to the tidyverse, where you absolutely have to change your code. It's just sort of
quality of life improvements, mostly, for you to either make your code more readable
or more efficient, or some combination of those. And because I can't help myself, I'm
going to sprinkle in some teaching tips along the way as well. So let's start with tidyverse
2.0, which was released this year. And there are two things in this meta package that are
new. One is the lubridate package is now a core tidyverse package. And the other one
is that package loading message got even longer. So let's take a peek at what those are. The
lubridate package is an incredibly useful package with a incredibly not-so-great name, in my
opinion. But it is a package that makes it really much easier to work with date times. So
maybe previously, you used to do this at the beginning of your R scripts or documents, and
now you can just get away with doing this, just the library tidyverse. And this is what
lubridate functionality looks like. I'm going to give sort of three progressively, I think, more
annoying to parse strings. One of them is just today's date as a numeric value, the other
one's a text string, and the other one is an actual sentence. What we can do is we can take each
one of these and apply the appropriate lubridate function. So in this case, the data is in the
order of year, month, and date. So then I apply YMD, and we can see that it turns it into a
date class. I can do the same thing where the data is in the order of MDY. Or I can say, just
take that sentence and figure out in there a date, month, and year, and an hour as well. And it does a
pretty good job of doing so. And you can also supply time zones to it, if that's the sort of thing
that you tend to work with. And if so, I am sorry. And then it will give you a POSIX CT class. So
this is, I think, pretty neat. And what is really neat about this is that particularly for that last
example, it lets you get away with not having to write regular expressions. And to me, that is a
huge quality of life improvement. The other one is that message that I said got longer. So when we
load the Tidyverse, now we can see an additional informational point that says, use the conflicted
package to force all conflicts to become errors. So what does that mean? It basically, we can
explicitly check for conflicts with, when we load the Tidyverse, with existing loaded packages. And
in this case, I'm loading the Tidyverse before loading any other things. So this is the conflicts
with base R, basically, or the stats package in this case. Filter and lag are functions that exist
there that Tidyverse is overwriting or dplyr. If the conflict resolution with base R looks
something like this, it just gives precedence to the most recently loaded package. So if I
have not loaded the Tidyverse yet, and I try to do something like filter for the species where
the penguins are Adélie, it will give me an error that's not like I can't find the filter function.
In fact, it's giving me the error of what would this sort of expression passed
onto stats filter would look like. After loading the Tidyverse, base R will silently use the last
loaded package, and things work nicely. Until they don't, I suppose. With conflicted, what you can
see is that if that package is loaded, the error is a little bit different. It is saying that I am
not going to just use one of the ones. It's saying there are two packages that have the filter function,
and you need to explicitly choose. And you can explicitly choose with sort of a method that
doesn't require conflicted at all by saying which package name and then colon colon the function,
or you can say I'm going to use filter a lot. I know that I want the dplyr filter going forward,
so for this session, I want to prefer dplyr filter. So from that point onwards in my session,
it is going to use the dplyr filter. So this is making things a lot more explicit,
which, when things are going fine, is almost overhead, frankly. But when they're not, it's
actually one of the more annoying, I think, error messages to sort of figure out when you're using
the wrong function from a package you didn't intend to. And this can grow to be an even bigger
problem when you have lots of packages that might have sort of named conflicts. So a little bit of
teaching tip around this. I said that loading the tidyverse message got even longer now,
and I did hear the sigh, and I am with you on that. But I think that it is important to show
these startup messages in the teaching materials and not hide them, especially if you teach with
slides. I know that it is so tempting to hide them because they take up so much space, but I think
it's important to address them early on because, first of all, you want to model good behavior. You
can't ask your students to read error messages if you don't read them yourself, or any messages for
that matter. So it requires, it encourages reading and understanding messages, warnings, and errors,
and what the distinction between them are. And also it helps during hard to debug situations
that result from Basar's silent conflict resolution. That's definitely going to be something that will
be even harder for especially new learners. That being said, do show your students how to hide those,
particularly at like an editing or polishing a document stage. All right, so let's talk about
dplyr, which got a lot of updates over the last year. Many, many updates that sort of expanded
its functionality. So I am going to talk about a few things that cross my path on almost a daily
basis. This is a non-exhaustive list, so at the end I will point you to other places where you can
read about other advances in dplyr. One of them is improved and expanded join functionality.
One of them is added functionality for per operation grouping. And the other one is some
quality of life improvements to case when and if else. Case one happens to be my favorite function
if I had to pick one, so that's why I'm highlighting it. And there are a few more. So let's start with
the joins. There is a new join by function that we can use for the by argument in any of the join
functions. And the new join functions have all gained new arguments that allow us to handle
various matches like one-to-one, one-to-many, many-to-many relationships, as well as explicitly
handling unmatched cases. So let's start with join by. Previously, maybe you did something like this
and even, I don't know, somehow seems crazier to me that you could actually get away with not
putting these quotes here as well, because that's how you would define a named vector in R.
Now, optionally, you can do this. So this is optional, but I do think it is a quality of
life improvement where we're passing a join by function and then we can actually use sort of
the non-standard evaluation to not have to quote our variable names.
So what does that look like? I'm going to make up a data set. This is real data,
but not necessarily the most useful data. Here are the coordinates for the three islands that
appear in our penguins data set, and what we're going to do is we are going to join these to our
data. With by alone, you could do something like this, where, and just to remind, the data frame
name is islands and the name of the island is in a column called name. So we can say,
take the penguins data frame and then left joined it such that the island in the penguins data frame
matches name in the islands data frame. Or you can do something like this, where you can actually
articulate things as, take the penguins data frame, left join it to the islands data frame,
where island is equal to name and the two. So we actually can use these sort of logical
operation that we use elsewhere in R as well. So my recommendation from a teaching perspective
would be to use join by, particularly because you can read it aloud, read it out loud as where
x is equal to y, which is something you probably already say if you do tend to read your code out
loud, wherever you have the double equal sign. And also you don't have to worry about the various ways
of sort of passing name vectors, where you can't have both of them uncoded here. This would be
invalid, but either this or this would be valid. And personally for me, I find, you know, being
able to teach joins early on to be a win. Being able to talk about name vectors early on to be
not as big a win. Not that they're not important, but something that can come a little bit later
perhaps. So it helps you avoid some awkward conversations, I would say. Now let's talk a
little bit about handling various matches. So previously join functions looked something like
this. A few more arguments, but mostly two data frames that you're joining and a by argument.
And now they have a few new arguments as well, with extensive documentation around them. But I
want to just highlight a few cases that might cross your path, and that might come in handy.
As a setup, we're going to create three data frames. One of them is a data frame of just three
penguins. These are just three randomly selected penguins from our data frame, and we know their
species and the island name. Another data frame is something hopefully realistic, where if you are
measuring anything in a scientific setting, chances are you are measuring things multiple times and
multiple times and averaging them or something like that. So this data frame indicates that for
those three penguins, we have their sample IDs and also a measurement ID, where instead of weighing
the penguin once, we weighed each penguin twice. So we have a measurement ID of one and two for
both. And the same thing for their flipper length as well. So we have these three data frames. You
can perhaps imagine a situation where different people have collected these data.
Now, one-to-many relationships, things work out pretty nicely. I have my three penguins data frame
that, remember, had three rows, a row per penguin, and I've joined it to the weight measurements
data frame, and everything looks fine. It's basically my measurements joined with the
species and island of those penguins. Not much to think about here.
Now, with many-to-many relationships, on the other hand, we get a warning. So here, I am taking my
weight measurements data frame, maybe from one of the scientists, and the flipper measurements data
frame from the other, and I just say, just bring them together by sample ID, and I get a warning
saying that row one of your first data frame matches multiple rows in your second data frame,
and row one of your second data frame matches multiple rows in your second one, and so on.
It says, if you want to silence this, tell me that you are, in fact, intending to do a many-to-many
match. So, we can go ahead and do that. We can go ahead and say, I do want to make a many-to-many
match. Does this look correct? What do we have here? We had one scientist take two measurements
each on three penguins, so six measurements, and another scientist take two measurements each on
the same three penguins, so another six measurements, and somehow what happened is I
ended up with a 12-row data frame. So, I have an explosion of rows, which doesn't seem so bad when
your options are six versus 12, but you can imagine a scenario where this could be problematic if you
had a large data, two large data sets that you're joining. What actually is happening is that we
probably should have joined by both sample ID and measurement ID, right? So, instead of joining
by a single variable, the penguin, or the sample ID, we probably should have joined by both so that
we ultimately have six rows in our data frame with measurements coming from the two scientists.
So, the takeaway message here is that, one, the many-to-many relationships can be costly,
particularly computationally, so the warnings are helpful to stop you and make you think, but the
warnings themselves aren't enough to get you to the right answer necessarily. So, the warning that
we saw here was simply talking about, I'm observing something happening here, and I want you to be
explicit about whether you want that to happen, and this is where the human needs to, sorry, this is
where the human needs to come into play and say, I know something about this data set joining by
these two variables makes a bit more sense. Now, let's do one more thing. I'm going to bring in one
more penguin, so that we have three penguins. I'm adding in one more, an Adelie penguin from the
Biscoe Island, and now let's join the four penguins data set to our weight measurements data set.
Remember, three penguins were measured so far, and what I've done is I've said, I'm going to take the
weight measurements from one of my scientists, and I'm going to join it with my four penguins
data set to get the information on the penguins, and what happened to the fourth penguin? Poof, it's gone.
And that's potentially what we intended to do. I mean, I explicitly selected left join here, right?
I am saying, keep all the rows in the left data frame, and don't worry about the rows in the right
data frame. Maybe that is true, but if you have a large data frame where you can't really see all of
the rows, where it's not so obvious what disappeared or did not disappear, that can be a pretty risky
move. So one thing you can do with a new argument unmatched is say, if anything is going to go poof,
just give me an error first. So let me, stop me in my tracks before I continue. And I think that this
sort of introduces a paradigm of programming where you're not just like writing things and
then just like expecting a whole document to render because you wrote the code correctly.
It actually is making you to explicitly use sort of the code that you're writing to check if what
you're doing is indeed what you're intending to do. So in this case, it says if there are any
unmatched cases that are going to go poof, just error out, and let me think about it. And it did
say that row four of y, that fourth penguin was not matched. So now I, as the analyst, have two
options. I can say, maybe I just want to do an inner join where I wanted to make sure that
that basically the matching penguins are the only ones that I want.
Or I could say that if there are any unmatched ones, just drop them, which is the exact same
result I had at the very beginning. The difference being that I am intentionally sort of doing this
and nothing is just sort of disappearing under my, like without me realizing.
Or you can just do nothing. You can just go with the default. So the defaults work just as you
would expect, but they don't necessarily allow you to catch yourself making errors, and chances are
you're working with more than three penguins at a time, and it is a lot easier to sort of
introduce these errors, particularly if you write in pipelines. If you're like me, chances are you're
like, yeah, yeah, we're going to left join. You know, my first data frame is on the left. I'm
just going, I think I know what I'm doing, but if you don't know your data really well,
it can be a risky move. And there are a bit more on joins as well. So we talked about join by,
we talked about different ways of handling relationships and unmatched cases. There are
two other exciting developments that are inequality joins and rolling joins that are basically all
made possible because now instead of saying, take this one variable from the first data frame and
this variable from the data frame, I actually into the join by function can pass on expressions
that say something like less than or greater than or whatnot. If you want to read more about these,
I have included some resources here, and I'll share the link to the slides at the end as well.
And if you're thinking, what in the world are inequality joins and rolling joins?
If you know, you know, okay, that is the reality. And I personally, for me, they don't cross my path
as often as some of the other things do. But I also don't tend to work a lot with
sort of time series-ish data sets, I think where these come into play a bit more.
That being said, we do have a new section in the second edition of R for Data Science that is
dedicated to the various types of joins that you can do. And these are also moves that you can
easily do with data table package and in SQL as well. So basically these sort of expanded functionality
in dplyr is sort of matching other tools that you could use in order to achieve the same outcome.
All right, and in terms of a teaching tip, I would say that the exploding joins, particularly where
we just ended up with like extra rows where we didn't intend, can be hard to debug for students.
Because I think joins are like inherently, in my experience, relatively straightforward to teach
and relatively straightforward to learn. But diagnosing when, you know, cases sort of disappear,
or when they gain an unexpected amount of cases, or performing a join without thinking and taking
down an entire teaching server, which tends to happen whenever we do sort of open-ended projects
with our students, these things do happen. So I think that teaching some of these sort of defensive
strategies of coding is using them for your own use is good. And I think teaching them can be
helpful as well, particularly if you're expecting that students will be working with data that might
be unfamiliar to them, where they may not have the intuition to be like, wait, why did I just all of
a sudden get 12 rows here like we were able to do so earlier? Another exciting functionality
in dplyr, a new functionality, is per-operation grouping. So previously, grouped summaries,
for example, looked something like this. You take a data frame, you group by a variable,
and then you can maybe calculate a summary statistic. Now, optionally, you can do this a
slightly different way, where you say summarize, and instead of group by happening in a previous step,
it is actually happening in summarize. And again, this is optional, group by is not going anywhere,
but it is something you might consider. Let's take a look at this. Remember this typical tidyverse
pipeline I showed earlier, and we actually did set dot groups equals drop here. So let's think about
why did we do that. If I don't do that, I end up with this message. To summarize has grouped by
output by species, and you can override this using the dot groups argument. So what? What
happened is I had grouped by species and sex, and then when I ran the summarize function after that,
it almost peels away one layer of grouping and leaves the data frame grouped behind it.
But frankly, it doesn't matter. I get the same ggplot at the end. I don't really care that it
was grouped to begin with. Turns out in this particular setting, I don't care. What if I was
doing something else? What if, for example, I was saying I want to group by these two variables,
I want to calculate the mean body mass, and then finally, I want to get the top row. So I'm going
to say slice head and give me the top row. These are two different outcomes, and in one of them,
I am not doing anything to address the grouping over here, and here I am dropping the groups.
And we can see that the output is different, and the reason why it's different is that on the
persistent group side, because our data frame that is going into the slice head function is grouped,
then slice head is grabbing, slicing one row per group, versus here, it's just giving us one row.
Another example of this is one of my favorite packages, I would say, when I'm doing reporting,
is the GT package, and it has a really nice functionality that if you feed in group data
frames to it, it will give you a table that sort of has these like, as you can see, these rows
that are sort of subheaders, I guess, per group, which is neat, but might be unexpected if that
is not what you were intending to do, if you did not intend for your data frame to be grouped going
into it. So this is what the output would look like if my data frame wasn't grouped. The exact
same output, right, the numbers are exactly the same, it's just how GT is handling a group data
frame versus a non-group data frame. So how do we handle groups? One option is what we did before.
I can say, yeah, I want to drop the groups once you summarize, and give me the mean body weights
per species and sex, just drop them, I don't need them anymore. Or I can say explicitly, keep them,
where I actually keep my data frame grouped by both of the variables, in case I want to actually
continue sort of using a group data frame for further operations. And there are a couple other
options as well, like keep last and stuff like that. Alternatively, what you can say is, I don't
want persistent groups. When I want to group things, I just want to do them in the summarize function
that I'm using, and then if I want things grouped again, I'll do it again. So in this case, what we're
doing is, instead of group by, we're saying in summarize, I can say group by one of the variables,
or group by multiple variables, where I can feed a vector into it, and get the same output. And you
can see that same output in terms of the numbers, I mean, but you can see that none of these data
frames are grouped ultimately. So we are basically doing per-operation grouping, as opposed to
persistent grouping. So what is, I mean, how do you choose between these two? I don't know, I think
whichever you want is the important thing. I think the important, the reason why the by functionality
has been added is because this, as much as the output that we've been seeing signals there are
groups here, it's very easy to miss that. Particularly easy to miss it if you tend to write really long
pipelines. And it can introduce errors, again, down the pipeline that can be hard to debug,
or unexpected results like that GT output that we were seeing. So group by is not superseded,
and not going away, and if you have your own sort of methods for successfully dealing
with the persistent grouping, then you should continue using that. But if this has been a
problem that you sort of encounter yourself running it into, it might be worthwhile to try
per-operation grouping. I will say that some of the verbs take by instead of dot by, and I just,
I don't know, it is what it is. There is a technical reason for it, I think it's a little
unfortunate to be perfectly honest. But they come with informative errors when you do dot by instead
of by, so at least it can sort of help you correct things. And in my heart I am hoping that that
bullet point can go away sometime, but I'm not sure technically how feasible that is.
Important to note that dot by always returns an ungrouped data frame, so that's why we're
calling it a per-operation grouping. And another important thing is that you can't just create
variables on the fly like you could with group by. So with group by you could almost sort of
skip a mutate step and create a variable that you want to group by. Frankly, I find code like this
hard to read, and hard to debug, and hard to come back to, so I think that this is not a loss,
but it's something to keep in mind. And another thing is that dot by doesn't sort grouping keys,
so I will actually switch over to the previous slide for a second to show what I mean by that.
So over here we're using dot by, and you can see that our, the order of the species is Adderley,
Jantu, and Chinstrap. So that's in the order in which they appear in the data frame,
not alphabetical order. However, if we look at the output of group by, here we go,
we can see that it's Adderley, Chinstrap, and Jantu, so they have been alphabetized.
So the dot by argument won't do the alphabetization, so that might be another
thing where you're thinking, I expected my results to be exactly the same,
just how I approach grouping differently, and that's not 100% true. Your results,
in a way, will be slightly different because they might be ordered differently.
All right, as a teaching tip, and I can't say this super authoritatively because I have not
taught with dot by, so I almost want to say teaching idea instead of a tip, but I think
the important thing would be to choose one grouping method and sort of stick to it throughout,
particularly because the functionality is the same. Ultimately, especially for new learners,
I would pick one and stick with it, and for more experienced learners, maybe particularly those
who are like designing their own functions and packages, I think this tells a nice story of
sort of evolution, and you can sort of go through the differences of each output like I have done
here and think about, you know, how do we choose which way to approach the same problem.
A couple other quality of life improvements for case when and if else,
the all else option in case when being denoted by dot default and also being less strict about
value type for both of these functions, so I'll show you what I mean by that.
Here are two sort of contrived examples where I'm creating a new variable x in my data frame df,
and I have three conditions, and I just happen to pick that the values are character strings.
And previously, you would have to say here are a few conditions and all else if none of those
conditions match, so that's why we said true, and if that needed to be an na for some reason,
you would have to say that's not just na but a character type na. With recent improvements,
we have sort of two new things that we can do. Instead of that true, you can actually just use
a dot default argument, and you don't have to worry about matching the na type. So it could look
something like this. So what I'm going to do is first I've calculated two things, the 25th and
75th percentile of body mass. I've also introduced a new function here, reframe, which sort of does
like a summarize-like move, but instead of just outputting one row per group, it's outputting
multiple rows per group. So these are just these two magic numbers that I want to take a note of.
I'm going to use these in a case when statement, my 25th and 75th percentiles. So with case when,
I can do something like this. Even though what I'm creating this categorical variable
that is character, I don't have to specify na character for the values that were nas,
and for my last option instead of true, I can just give a dot default.
How big an improvement is this? I would say that if you perhaps have had to teach case when many
times, you might think that is an improvement. If you're sort of writing case when arguments
yourself and you're a pretty experienced R user, I'm not sure how big an improvement that is.
I do think that the na type, at least for me, I don't often think about, oh, I need to match my
na type when I write these statements, and I often will be sort of stopped in my tracks with an error
message and then have to fix things. So I think that is a big quality of life improvement.
And that similarly works with if else as well. So here I'm creating a new variable
that basically sort of adds a unit to my body mass, and you can see that the first sort of the
condition for true is a character string, and I can again get away with just saying
if the value is na, just make it na as opposed to na character.
From a teaching perspective, I think being able to omit the na character in friends is a good,
an important improvement, mostly because I think it's, you know, something like if else or case
when is so useful to learn about and to teach about pretty early on in sort of work doing data
analysis, and I would say earlier than thinking about different types of na's, which are
important, but not necessarily the first thing you need to learn to start analyzing data.
And a few more things. There are a few new functions that you might look into,
like case match, which further simplifies your case when code, being able to select columns
inside a mutate or summarize with a new function pick, and also some reproducibility and performance
updates to arrange. These cross my path a little less regularly than the others,
so I sort of left it at feel free to read about them. And lastly, or actually second to last
quickly, let's talk about tidy R. A few more updates in tidy R as well, but I want to highlight
specifically one of them, which is a set of functions that supersede, and what I mean by
supersede is we recommend you prefer them over them, though the older functions are not going
away, called sort of separate functions. And you can sort of see in this table, we can separate
with a delimiter, we can separate by position, or we can separate by regular expression. And we can
separate to make columns where we go wider, or we can separate to make rows where we go longer,
sort of like pivot wider and pivot longer. So here's an example of someone who collected data
and did so in a really annoying way, where they have, oh apologies, I really should,
these IDs should have been 1, 2, 3, they're not going to harm anything in our example,
but they should all say 1. But so we have three penguins, and we have some description column
about them. So what we might want to do is we might want to split this into multiple columns.
So I could do something like just split it into two columns, so separate, wider, delim.
This basically is what separate looked like previously as well, frankly. But we can see lots of
sort of like added text here, right? The word species being repeated, or the word island being
repeated is entirely unnecessary. And you could stop here and say, I know how to remove certain
text strings. I'll do that with a mutate, and I'll be done. And if that's you, that's great.
If this is you, first of all, kudos to you. It's not always me. But if you like writing regular
expressions, like as a thrill, you can do that. And you can say, I want to separate now with a
regular expression. And if you tend to work with data where a column tends to incorporate information
about a lot of things, this tends to be, so the example in the documentation for this is, for
example, about some census data from the U.S., where they'll have a column of a numeric string.
And actually, if you parse it, it tells you something about the census block and the address,
the state, so on and so forth. So if you tend to work with data like that, this can be incredibly
useful. And you can see that instead of a delimiter, we basically have a pattern we're specifying.
And we're saying that the first thing you see will be species. And then, you know, grab the next word
after that until the comma. And then there's going to be a comma. And then the next thing you see
will be an island and a dash after it. And then grab everything else after that. And it basically
will put it in place. And chances are, if you're having to do this, chances are these are a little
bit more complex than what I have here. As I said, I just don't find it all that thrilling myself to
write regular expressions. So I gave a simpler example here to illustrate the concept. But the
idea is that it gives you a lot more power to genuinely separate these things. And then there's
enhanced reporting when things fail. So this is what the separate function looked like previously.
It had things like, what if I had extra things? What should I do with them? Or what if I didn't
have enough things? How should I fill in the boxes? And now, you actually have, again, similar to that
the unmatched cases example that I gave, an option you can use that you would never want
in your final code, but can be incredibly helpful when you're actually developing code,
which is an option of debug. So you can say, I want to just show me what is going wrong where,
instead of just telling me in which row and making me scroll through my data frame to try to find.
And once you sort of run your code in that debug mode and you can see a summary of what might be
going wrong, you can then decide, OK, if I have too few pieces, should I align them at the beginning
or should I align them at the end? If I have too many pieces, should I drop them or should I merge
them? So some of the functionality is similar to what we had before, but this idea of erroring out
or debugging help you with a little bit more defensive coding. And as a teaching tip, I would
say that particularly if we tend to teach folks who come from spreadsheet background, and I am one of
those, I first learned how to do data analysis in Excel as an actuary, then I learned R. And,
you know, if you work with folks who do text to columns in Excel, they know very well that
there are many ways of splitting that text into columns. This is true for like Google Sheets users
as well. So even though it looks like new functionality and like extra functionality,
this is actually something that folks encounter in other avenues as well. And this is just sort
of like putting a name to it in R. All right, one quick thing with ggplot2, where if you use,
if you have lines and you set the size to make them thicker, now it will give you this sort of
warning and say you should use line width instead. And I did this, I wanted to show this to you,
just to end things on a light note, just check your teaching materials thoroughly to not make
a fool of yourself when teaching, because I feel like I just went through an entire academic year
of standing in front of my slides with a warning saying use line width instead. All right, a few
other things. There is better string R and tidy R alignment. There's an ability now to distinguish
between NA in levels and NA in values and forecasts. There is new and more straightforward
to learn and teach API for the Rvest package for web scraping, and shorter, more readable,
and in some cases, faster SQL queries in dbplyr if you tend to go between databases and R often.
And a few more. And if you want to keep up with these, if you actually want to keep up with them
at real time, the tidyverse blog is a good place to read with each package sort of update
or upcoming updates where we ask for feedback. This is where we post things. And there's also,
it's a good place to learn about other tidyverse adjacent development, which is things like tidy
model or web R. And if you haven't heard about what that is, I do recommend reading that blog
post. I won't ruin it for you. If you're looking for a more comprehensive overview of everything
that's like current to date with data R for data science, second edition, I literally turned in the
last edits on my flight here today. So I think it should be going to print soon. And thank you so
much. The slides are here on the top link. And the code that I've gone through is in this GitHub
repository. If there are questions, I'm happy to answer.
So if there's any questions, just have a listen and give me a hand.
Hi. Hi. In your discussion about joins, I noticed you didn't mention anything about keys.
A lot of problems that I've seen in working with databases is the lack of a unique key.
And so quite often you get this exploding data, which you talked about,
but also missing data and this sort of stuff. Is there any reason why you haven't talked about
keys? So I haven't used the word key specifically. That's right. But those basically would be what
you are passing into the by function or the by argument or the join by function. Yeah. And I
guess in the case of the exploding rows that we saw, that was sort of like being sort of
not careful about what makes a distinct key. But I guess in this case, if I'm understanding the
question correctly, you don't need to have a single column that is a unique key identifying
things. You can simply pass multiple variables that make up a unique key. Yeah. I guess it comes
from a diagnosis perspective that I checked over SAS code quite a lot. And one of the big problems
was the lack of unique key. And so they used to drop the duplicate variables values, which was
terrible. Yeah. Lost a lot of data. And of course, when somebody came back and there was a sort
involved, different results. And it's all because I didn't have a unique key. And I think it's quite
important as a concept to think, OK, I've got a problem with my data set. Is it because I'm not
identifying how to link the data sets? Yeah. Anyway, that's right. Yeah. And the relationship
argument that I mentioned, where I've given an example of a many to many relationship,
it will take other options like one to many or many to one that I think would help address
some of that as well. Thank you. Yes, I had a question about the separate sort of functions.
You had this nice table that was like a two by three layout. And there was one that was missing
that was separate longer regex. Yeah. I'm wondering, and I realize that didn't exist previously either.
Is there any reason why you can't do that? Because I've actually had a couple of occasions where I've
wanted to. So it doesn't currently exist. I am not 100 percent sure of a technical reason why.
I think one of the things is that we haven't come up ourselves with examples where that was useful.
But I would say that will be the sort of thing where especially if you have a use case for it
to chime in on the issues for a tidy R. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, it's pretty niche and obscure and
with horrifying data to work with. But, you know, I think that niche and obscure is equally valid,
isn't it? I think that I think actually being able to find real examples of those is so helpful for
thinking through sort of enhancements as such. If you think about it, the separate function
was a very naive approach to a real problem, but it didn't address any of these like things that
might feel niche and obscure. But then when you think about it and look at the issues like there
are at least 100 people struggling with the same thing. So we have a question from Slack as well.
So the question is about the group by enhancement, whether there's been some kind of
a performance enhancement behind it as well. There is their performance enhancement. I
am unable to answer that question authoritatively. So I do not know.
I do know that it is not slower, but I don't I believe the original sort of motivation for it
wasn't performance. It was the issue that we talked about this like group sort of lingering around
silently was the original motivation. And the dot by argument should not have did not make things
slower, but has it made things faster? I'm not sure. I do know that there were comments about
performance in the blog posts, though. So that will be a place to look. But I don't know off the
top of my head. So I actually have a question as well. So you did so many new kind of functions
as well as arguments you're introducing, which I like some of them like case match, join inequality,
join. I'm actually wondering the process that happens behind the scenes of how you decide like
what is going to be like available function, what's going to be available argument. I wonder
if you can share a bit of the process. Yeah. So there are a few ways that this happens. Sometimes
it is a sort of a minor fix and one person in the team implements it and another reviews it because
like there was an issue open and a few thumbs up and a few people chiming in saying yes, this would
be good. But for example, for something like this and also this enhancement for the separate
functions went hand in hand with one that I didn't get into detail, which was the alignment
of functions in string R and tidy R that deal basically with character strings. Because if you
think about this whole separate thing is about splitting character strings oftentimes. There is
a process that is sort of inspired by pythons, I believe peps, where you sort of like propose
an enhancement or a change or an update and then you do a write-up. So someone from the tidyverse
teams does a write-up. The repo is called tidyups, so it's under the tidyverse organization. And so
some ideas develop there and we actually, we have weekly meetings where someone will present on it
and especially for something like this, I'm making up a number, but I wouldn't be surprised if this
was like three or four separate like presentations where we discuss what is the right syntax, what's
the right API for it, what RH cases we're missing or not missing. And then, you know, there's a
proposal that's written that a couple people on the team will be like, okay, I'm sort of a signatory
to this proposal. I can see how this is valuable. And then for big updates like this one and also
many of the dplyr updates, one of the team members will often write a blog post sort of soliciting
feedback from the community. So while the package is still in development, sort of soliciting feedback
and then if sort of like that feedback is feeling like, okay, there's enough, like people can sort
of see how this would improve their workflows, ultimately things get merged in. And then
sometimes things get merged in that really like piss people off because like they give a message
or something. And it's really a balancing game of how many people's like maybe niche problems that
have we been able to solve because they work with this like, you know, incredibly useful but
awfully formatted government data set versus a few people need to read messages. So it's really a
balancing game and I don't think the goal isn't necessarily to make every single user happy
necessarily, but I think two goals are sort of making things so that we don't lose functionality
and also making things so that functionality is consistent across packages. Because as you can
imagine, as the number of people who work on the packages and the functionality of the packages
grow, sometimes things diverge and it's useful to sort of take a pause and take a look at, okay,
we have these characteristic things happening in two packages. Like how do we make sure
this is not super confusing to users? And so issues from people who do data science, like who
actually do analysis are really helpful. And I will say that hearing from educators who actually
have to articulate this and teach it to new learners who ask the most critical questions of
why did you say that the other day and you're saying this today are also incredibly helpful
for finding those misalignment cases. Okay, well thank you very much for sharing that.
Yeah, you're welcome.
I was going to ask the question that Emmy asked, so I'll ask a follow-up one, which is
what can we expect to see in the next edition of Time of Youth?
You know, let me try to think if there's like something I know for sure.
That's a really good question and I don't have a good answer for it off the top of my head.
And I think it's because over the last couple months I've been so like in the mindset of
catching up with what's there in terms of the book that I haven't done a whole lot of a look ahead.
I don't think we have a big tidy up like this that's sitting there. I do know that there's
quite a bit of work in terms of sort of performance enhancements that happen with
dplyr particularly. And I will admit that I tend to be like I think they're like super crucial but
they don't like I personally don't get affected by them a lot. And so I tend to be a little bit
behind the curve when it comes to performance stuff. So I don't have a great answer for it.
So question from online. So there's a theme set function in ggplot to overwrite the default.
Would something similar for dplyr be a good idea? Set default grouping behavior.
Good question. So I am a big fan of that theme set function particularly for things like writing
a report or doing a presentation where I can just set that at the beginning and I don't have to
keep adding sort of theme arguments. I can see how setting some of these as an option can be useful.
I can also see how that can if it's not as explicit as theme set where you do it sort of like
there's things where you can do theme set versus there's options that you can set. And generally
I would think that the options is not the way to go because they tend to
be sort of not so transferable between folks like for reproducibility purposes.
Off the top of my head I don't see why that wouldn't be a good idea. So I would say that
would be a good issue to open to see if there is like sort of traction or if others can think of
sort of reasons not to. So another question online is are there any plans to introduce
tidyverse paradigm to Python since RStudio is now called Posit? So I can say that on the tidyverse
team there is Michael who works on Shuba which is sort of a dplyr port to Python. There's also
Hassan who works on Plot9 which is like a ggplot2 port to Python. So in terms of supporting open
source work that sort of take this design philosophy and implement it in Python the company
has made an investment in it and actually just like personally I can say they're hearing from
them in terms of their development process and how things sort of similar conversations happen
in Python land has been super informative for me and I think has made the team better.
I don't think the goal is like I can't speak for the whole company or for like the whole team as a
whole but I don't think the goal is like let's make everything tidyverse like just like let's have a
tidyverse package in Python as well but I think that sort of like being able to have those folks
on the team has been really good for making sure there's like a two-way communication happening
because it is really easy to sort of just be in your own land and be developing here and
be not aware of advances happening elsewhere.
Thank you so much for the talk. I found it really useful. I want to follow up one of the questions
about the joining functions because you had a few examples there where you were showing how you can
use the unmatched and the multiple arguments in conjunction with the type of join function
you were using. I'm just wondering if you could talk a little bit more about that and if you could
type of join function you were using. When I was learning about this a few days ago I also saw
another one that briefly popped up, relationship. You're right. I was hoping you could help me
understand when I would use the relationship argument versus the other methods that you
outlined of the other arguments and function names. So one of the ways I mentioned the relationship
argument was, so if there are many-to-many relationships, previously this would not give
this warning. It would silently just sort of give the output and say hey you asked me to join by
this column so I joined by that column. So now there is this warning that says this may not be
what you intended to do or at least we want you to be explicit about what you intended to do and
so you can set relationship many-to-many to say yeah no that is exactly what I intended to do.
In other cases you can set this to one-to-many or many-to-one and similarly if that was what was
sort of identified as a potential problem here the warning would have said if a one-to-many
relationship is expected set it to that. So it's sort of making it explicit in your code
and it's in a way using warnings to train you to sort of be better or more sort of aware of what
you're doing, which I think is good. I will say though that at a recent-ish meeting one of the
things I did bring up was that I think we tend to use in R in general for sure but even in the
tidyverse where we sort of talk about consistency we tend to use like warnings and messages a little
bit interchangeably sometimes and personally for me my vision was that I don't know if this will
work out my vision is that we use one for call to attention and one for call to action and right now
they're sort of mismatched and I find that really sort of difficult. I mean I can just like overlook
it when I am doing stuff but particularly from a teaching perspective to say why is you know the
fact that you have NAs when you do a ggplot a message but this is a warning like or why isn't
it the other way around and there isn't always a consistent reason for it there definitely isn't
all of R but then you don't expect that because you know all sorts of packages are out there
but I think that sort of consistency is something we would like to see in the tidyverse so I think
we'll do a bit of thinking about this idea of like using messaging in general generically
to teach you to be more intentional in what you're doing but then making sure that we have a good
tagline for and if it wants you to do blah it'll be a message if it's a call to attention it's a
message if it's a call to action it's a warning or something like that so that we can sort of
see more consistency across the various messages we're seeing. That's my dream.
So maybe last question.
Thank you for the talk. I have a follow-up question actually to Emi and Rob's also kind of about
package development so on one of the slides you kind of mentioned you know there are some things
that are useful to teach students who like are just learning data like analysis and then other
things that are kind of more useful for people who might be writing their own functions and packages
and as someone who like writes tries to write packages the speed of development in the tidyverse
is very hard to keep up with but there's also obviously a lot appealing about the kind of
design philosophy. Do you have any approaches to like how to kind of learn the tidyverse
like design philosophy like where to start good resources? Yeah so style.tidyverse.org I think is
the booklet I will say for now. I think Hadley will write that book at some point if he stops
writing other things. So that's about sort of tidyverse design principles and some of it is
very simple things like oh have line breaks after pluses in your gg plus but some of it
is indeed about sort of how do we message, how do we warn, like how to construct an error message. So
this year one of the things I didn't mention and you know it's a shame I didn't because
Lionel did a lot of work on like better error messages and turns out that's like a really
like technically hard problem very easy for me to criticize when an error message doesn't sound
like normal right. I'm like this doesn't read well but turns out solving that is a technically
hard problem at times to identify exactly what function is resulting in the error for example.
So there's some stuff about that there. I will also say that like you saw by example when Rob
asked like what's next I'm like I'm on the tidyverse team and I don't know the answer to
that. So keeping up with the tidyverse yeah you can read the blog but I don't know that that is a
goal to aspire to because I mean if you think about it there are you know 10 plus humans whose
full-time job is to work on the tidyverse. Of course like there's you know a lot of development
but I do think that keeping up with a blog or something and sort of looking at it as tags in
terms of this is the sort of data I tend to work with what's happening in that space and scoping
it that way is a lot more doable. So when I say for example I'm not that in tune with the performance
updates I mean yeah maybe I should be but at the same time it doesn't cross my path as often but
like not being in tune with what's new and tidy are would be a lot more devastating for like what
I try to do on a daily basis. So I think figuring out what pieces of this vast sort of like ecosystem
touch you most regularly and keeping up with that and reading about that is helpful and the style
guide is helpful in terms of the design process as well.
So we will be heading out to dinner after this so if you like to have more questions
maybe you can actually ask them but otherwise thank you very much and please give a hand.
you